hey this is pressure marker the green
dots appear to be moving as a circle
gently rolling inside of the larger blue
circle but what you're seeing is
actually not true this is an optical
illusion there are two parts to this
puzzle first can you figure out what the
true path of each dot is and second can
you prove why this illusion happens give
it some thought and when you're ready
keep watching the rest of the video for
the mathematical explanation to the
circular motion illusion
so part one of the puzzle is that the
true path of each dot is a straight line
if you follow any particular green dot
you'll see its following exactly a
straight line segment and going back and
forth let me present this to you in
another way so that it's easier to
follow I'll give each dot a different
color and now I will set the dots along
straight line segments going back and
forth together all the dots appear like
they're moving like a circle that's
rolling around and in fact when I remove
the lines it does appear like we have a
circle that's rolling inside of the
larger circle but I will set colors to
each of the dots paths and you'll see
that each dot is moving along a diameter
of the larger circle each dot is
actually only moving in a straight line
segment and yet together all of the dots
are creating a circular motion
so we know that each dot is moving in a
straight line but now the bigger
question is why does this happen
what's the geometrical explanation let's
get into the details we'll start out
with the circle that has a radius R and
we have a smaller circle that's half of
its radius let's let this circle roll
inside the larger circle we're going to
keep track of where the green dot goes
in the smaller circle follow the path of
this green dot if you see the path that
traces out it's exactly a straight line
segment that's the diameter of the
larger circle so this is good for
illustration purposes but now we need to
prove mathematically that this happens
and that it happens for every single
point in the smaller circle this is
known as Copernicus's theorem if a small
circle with radius R over 2 is perfectly
rolling in a large circle with radius R
a point on the smaller circle
circumference traces out a straight line
segment exactly equal to the larger
circle diameter so we have a large
circle with the center point o we'll
consider a smaller circle that has half
of its radius we're going to trace where
this point P in the smaller circle
traces out so we have this smaller
circle and we can imagine letting it
roll for a little bit so we now need to
see where is this new Green Point so we
have the circle where the circle has
rolled too and this P prime is the new
location of P will denote M as the point
at which the small circle now contacts
the large circle
so what we want to prove is we want to
prove that P Prime and P are on the same
straight line diameter of the large
circle in an alternate way of saying
that is we want to prove the angles em o
P Prime and M o P are equal this will
imply that the point P prime is on the
large circle xander now as I've drawn it
it looks like they're all on the same
line because that is the case but we
don't actually know that so we're going
to have to prove that so here are the
steps to doing that so the first part is
that because point P moves to P Prime
the arcs and P and NP prime have the
same length next since the small circles
radius is half of the large circles
radius the angle size of arc MP prime is
double that of arc MP furthermore since
angle M o P prime is an inscribed angle
in the small circle it has half the
measure of the angle size of the arc MP
prime so we put all this together and
where you can get the following series
of equations we have the angle M o P
prime which is equal to half the angle
size of the arc MP prime that's by the
inscribed angle theorem next we have the
angle size of n P prime is equal to 2
times the angle size of n P the arc this
is because we have the small circle
subtending an arc of the same length as
the larger circle with twice the rates
next we have the rcmp is equal to the
angle MO P that's because mo P is a
central angle of the circle and then we
have the one-half and the two cancel out
so we end up with the last equation
that's equal to angle NOP therefore
we've shown that angles mo P Prime and
Mo
P are equal to each other and that's
what we wanted to prove this means point
P prime is on the diameter of the larger
circle so this proof by the way will
work once you get up to either 90
degrees clockwise or counterclockwise
rotation when you need to go beyond that
you could just imagine that you do the
same proof except it's all reflected
across so it's the other point P double
Prime on the other side of the diameter
so this shows that when you have a point
on the small circle and you trace it out
along this rolling in the larger circle
it will always be along the diameter of
the larger circle did you figure out the
illusion and then did you know why it
works thanks for watching this video
please subscribe to my channel I make
videos on math and game theory you can
catch around my blog mind your decisions
as you can follow on Facebook Google+
and patreon you can catch her on social
media at Prashant Walker and if you like
this video please check out my books
there are links in the video description